/*
Title: On Being Bad at Things
Author: Logan Buckley
Description: The importance of making terrible art
Date: 2014-10-12
*/

---

Last week, while doing some house cleaning on a day off, I found a box
of oil paints and brushes that I'd forgotten in a drawer. A couple of
years ago I was enthusiastic about the idea of being a painter, so I
read some books, bought some supplies, and defiled two or three
canvases before forgetting about the project entirely. Finding the
paints got me thinking about the course these sorts of interests take
for me -- enthusiasm, grossly unrealistic imaginings of the
possibilities (a new career!), followed inevitably by a few abortive
failures to live up to my own expectations before I move on to the
next thing.

This is a pattern that extends to a lot of areas of my life, I think,
including blogging. Since writing well is important to me, I've
treated past attempts at blogging far too importantly and
self-consciously, and not given myself space to fail, learn, and
grow. Too often I've avoided writing rather than risk writing poorly.

But after I found the box of paints, something different happened. The
cycle began, but in an accelerated, muted sort of way. _I must learn
to paint,_ I thought, followed more or less immediately by _I can't
learn to paint well and also get better at writing, running,
programming and web design, being human, etc, etc_. But the idea of
sitting in the park and carefully daubing paint onto the canvas still
appealed to me. It was a beautiful day. What better way to appreciate
the day's beauty than to try, however futilely, to capture it? What
more mindful way to see the park, to take in the leaves and trees and
people?

So I put on some old jeans and a t-shirt and brought my paints to the
park. I was determined not to paint something good but simply to paint
something -- maybe even determined to paint something bad. Determined
to enjoy the process of painting without worrying about the result. So
I walked around for a little while, worrying a little bit about
spilling turpentine on myself but mostly taking in the view in a new
way: will this fit on a canvas? Are there interesting shapes? Clear
colors? Eventually I settled on a concrete bridge with a red-painted
railing in the woods. I hopped over the creek on a bridge of rocks and
sat down to paint.

Then, of course, I remembered how hard painting is. Normally I think
of painting as being basically like drawing with colors. Since I'm not
terrible at drawing, I expect not to be terrible at painting. But
regardless of the similarities between the two, painting feels
basically nothing like drawing. If I were drawing the bridge I
probably would have produced something mediocre. Instead, my attention
taken up by trying to mix reasonable colors with my limited palette of
low-grade oil paints, I managed to produce something utterly,
laughably terrible. Like, really horrible. Offensive to all sighted
beings.

I had a great time.

You can't learn how to do something without being bad at it, so I've
been thinking lately that a degree of controlled shamelessness is
something worth cultivating. (Emphasis on controlled. This doesn't
apply all the time.) I think this is important not only at the lowest
levels of skill, but right up to the top. There are times when it's
important to produce a polished final product, of course, and those
are probably not the times for this sort of shamelessness. But there
are always other times when we have the chance to experiment, to try
something new, and it's important when those opportunities arise not
to hold ourselves back for fear of doing something imperfect. For me,
periodically trying things that I'm actively bad at is a good way to
cultivate that willingness to experiment, that openness to learning.

That's part of the spirit motivating me to start this blog: shedding
some of the self-conscious criticality that sometimes plagues my
writing, conversations and thoughts, and keeping myself open to
learning.
